+++
title = "Open letter on mental health"
date = 2020-02-01T08:45:00Z
description = "An open letter to all people who, like me, suffer from anxiety and panic attacks."
[taxonomies]
categories = ["Mental health"]
tags = ["mental health"]
+++

I've told myself many times: I should write about it. And just as many times
I've told myself: who's asking you to? Who is this going to help? They'll say
you're seeking attention and begging for pity. I don't even have a happy ending,
a moral, any scrap of a positive message. The only thing I can say is that you
get to survive. There are going to be ups and downs, but you get to survive.
I've always wondered if people who live a so-called "normal" life realize how
lucky they are to be able to leave the house, go to dinner at an unknown place,
take a train, a plane, even spend days away from their own roof. Yet I know well
that it's possible. This was my life until I was a little over twenty. How much
stupid stuff I did when I was a kid: trains taken without a specific
destination, buses to mountain areas searching for a girl I'd met a few days
before with no other information than "she's from the town Such-and-Such."

At some point I started feeling sick: tachycardia, shortness of breath, the head
that stops reasoning and enters a primitive and instinctive mode that generates
behavior more similar to that of an animal than a human being. You're convinced
you're dying: every single cell in your body screams it at you in a way that's
impossible to ignore. It's like experiencing the first ten minutes of Saving
Private Ryan in the first person. However, there's no war, you're not even at
the movies, you're just an asshole in some random place whose brain has decided
to play a nasty trick on you.

A little while ago a friend scolded me for missing an appointment and not
warning him. It's unforgivable, I know; in fact, I apologized to him. But how
could I explain to him that until a few minutes before I was convinced I was
going? Because this is what happens when you're sick: you avoid things. You
avoid going out, doing things, seeing friends, even people with whom you feel
protected. It doesn't matter. Nothing matters when you're sick. You only
understand that you have to protect yourself. From what? From fear, from the
irrational. From the fear of fear. Once a friend who saw me in the grip of panic
told me "you're funny." And it's true. You're in a burning skyscraper, and
you've jumped from a window to avoid a worse death, and you have the absolute
conviction that the skyscraper is burning, but whoever is looking at you from
outside only sees a person falling into the void, waiting to crash to the
ground.

Panic attacks never come alone. They're usually accompanied by depression.
Obviously, duh. Imagine how cheerful the life of a person who's afraid to leave
the house can be. And depression brings panic attacks. It's a loophole, and
getting out of it is only possible thanks to therapy. Getting out... I don't
know, I don't think it's possible to get out of it, at least for me. Some time
ago I was at my psychiatrist's, and I told him: "I'm tired, I can't enjoy
anything anymore since I don't even remember how many years" and he replied:
"yes, but therapy has allowed you to live a dignified life." A dignified life,
you understand? This is what I'm allowed. A dignified life. In other words:
don't complain because at least you still have dignity.

Anyway, the real reason I'm writing is to tell all the people like me who are
out there (and there are many, oh if there are many: mental health is destined
to become the number one problem for world health in the coming years) that you
can feel better. That therapy exists. That therapy is generally twofold: a
psychiatrist prescribes medications that help you feel better while a
psychologist helps restructure thoughts to avoid falling into the cognitive
errors that generate discomfort. But don't have me explain these things to you:
go to a psychiatrist or psychologist if you need clarification. And don't be
afraid: mental health care no longer has anything to do with One Flew Over the
Cuckoo's Nest (although it remains a good film).

You'll say, well, you must have gone through some kind of trauma, you must have
had some serious problem in your life, which is why you suffer from this
condition. Forgive me if I burst out laughing in your face: I've always had a
very normal life, I wasn't mistreated as a child, I'm not a special person, I'm
just an asshole who got a fake ticket in the serotonin lottery.

This also serves as an apology to all the people I've told a lie so to avoid a
situation that caused me stress and who thought "this guy is stupid, or he's an
asshole, or maybe both." Feel free to think so. Thank you. And for all those who
live my same condition: I'm sorry, good luck and, if you're lucky enough, find
someone who will put up with you and support you because it's the only thing
that really makes a difference.
